v9 & v10: Examine custom indexing (#4319)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: Reference/Searching/Examine/Indexing/index.md

﻿---

> versionFrom: 8.0.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
versionFrom: 9.0.0
```

versionTo: 10.0.0
---

# Custom indexing
## Customizing the built in indexes

> You can modify the built in indexes in several ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can modify the built-in indexes in the following ways:
```

* Changing the `IValueSetValidator` to change what goes into the index
* Take control of the entire index creation pipeline to completely change the implementation

We can do all this by using the `ConfigureNamedOptions` pattern.

## Creating a ConfigureOptions class

We will start by creating a ConfigureExamineOptions class, that derives from `IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>`:
```c#
using Examine.Lucene;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Options;

namespace MySite
{

>     public class ConfigureExamineOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public class ConfigureExternalIndexOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>
```

    {
        public void Configure(string name, LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }

        public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }
    }
}
```

:::note

> In this documentation we will use the `ConfigureExamineOptions` class for everything, it is recommended that you seperate this class out per filter for simplicity, for example if you do a lot of configuring for the ExternalIndex class, you would have a `ConfigureExternalIndex` class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sample focuses solely on altering the external index and thus we name the class `ConfigureExternalIndexOptions`. If you are altering multiple indexes, it is recommended to have separate classes for each index - i.e. `ConfigureExternalIndexOptions` for the external index, `ConfigureInternalIndexOptions` for the internal index and so on.
```

Reviewer: I figure we might as well document what we preach as recommended practice by naming the sample configuration appropriately?

:::

When using the `ConfigureNamedOptions` pattern, we have to register this in a composer for it to configure our indexes, this can be done like this:

```c#
using Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.DependencyInjection;

namespace MySite
{
    public class ExamineComposer : IComposer
    {
        public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
        {

>             builder.Services.ConfigureOptions<ConfigureExamineOptions>();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            builder.Services.ConfigureOptions<ConfigureExternalIndexOptions>();
```

        }
    }
}
```
### Changing field value types

> By default Examine will store values into the Lucene index as "Full Text", meaning it will be indexed and analyzed for a textual search. However, if a value that you are storing in a field is numerical, a date/time or another specific value type then you might want to change how this is stored in the index. This way you will be able to take advantage of some features such as numerical range or date features, etc...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default Examine will store values into the Lucene index as "Full Text" fields, meaning the values will be indexed and analyzed for a textual search. However, if a field value is numerical, date/time or another non-textual value type, you might want to change how the value is stored in the index. This will let you take advantage of some value type specific search features such as numerical or date range.
```

There is some documentation about this in the [Examine documentation](https://shazwazza.github.io/Examine/configuration).

The easiest way to modify how a field is configured is using the ConfigureNamedOptions pattern like so:

```c#
using Examine;
using Examine.Lucene;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Options;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core;

namespace MySite
{

>     public class ConfigureExamineOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public class ConfigureExternalIndexOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>
```

    {
        public void Configure(string name, LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            if (name.Equals(Constants.UmbracoIndexes.ExternalIndexName))
            {
                options.FieldDefinitions.AddOrUpdate(new FieldDefinition("price", FieldDefinitionTypes.Double));
            }
        }

        // Part of the interface, but does not need to be implemented for this.
        public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }
    }
}
```

> This will either add the `price` field to the index, or if the field already exists, update date its type to double.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will ensure that the `price` field in the index is treated as a `double` type (if the `price` field does not exist in the index, it is added).
```

## Changing IValueSetValidator

> An `IValueSetValidator` is responsible for validating a `ValueSet` to see if it should be included in the index and/or filtering the data in the `ValueSet`. For example, by default the validation process for the ExternalIndex checks if a `ValueSet` has a category type of either "media" or "content" (not member). If a `ValueSet` was passed to the ExternalIndex and it did not pass this requirement it would be ignored.

Reviewer: I don't think people will understand the "filtering the data" part of this phrase. Perhaps this can be clarified some?

Author: @kjac I've tried adding an explanation for filtering 👍

Reviewer: @Zeegaan much better! Thank you 😄

The `IValueSetValidator` implementation for the built in indexes, can be changed like this:

```c#
using Examine.Lucene;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Options;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core;
using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Examine;

namespace MySite
{
    public class ConfigureExamineOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>
    {
        public void Configure(string name, LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            if (name.Equals(Constants.UmbracoIndexes.MembersIndexName))
            {
                options.Validator = new MemberValueSetValidator(null, null, new[] {"email"}, null);
            }
        }

>         public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
>         {
>             throw new System.NotImplementedException("This is never called and is just part of the interface");
>         }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Part of the interface, but does not need to be implemented for this.
        public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }
```

    }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::note
Remember to register `ConfigureMemberIndexOptions` in your composer.
:::

```

* Changing the `IValueSetValidator` to change what goes into the index

> * Take control of the entire index creation pipeline to completely change the implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Take control of the entire index creation pipeline to change the implementation
```

        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }

        public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }
    }
}
```

:::note
In this sample we are altering the external index and thus we name the class `ConfigureExternalIndexOptions`. If you are altering multiple indexes, it is recommended to have separate classes for each index - i.e. `ConfigureExternalIndexOptions` for the external index, `ConfigureInternalIndexOptions` for the internal index and so on.
:::

When using the `ConfigureNamedOptions` pattern, we have to register this in a composer for it to configure our indexes, this can be done like this:

```c#
using Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.DependencyInjection;

namespace MySite
{
    public class ExamineComposer : IComposer
    {
        public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
        {
            builder.Services.ConfigureOptions<ConfigureExternalIndexOptions>();
        }
    }
}
```
### Changing field value types

> By default Examine will store values into the Lucene index as "Full Text" fields, meaning the values will be indexed and analyzed for a textual search. However, if a field value is numerical, date/time or another non-textual value type, you might want to change how the value is stored in the index. This will let you take advantage of some value type specific search features such as numerical or date range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Examine will store values into the Lucene index as "Full Text" fields, meaning the values will be indexed and analyzed for a textual search. However, if a field value is numerical, date/time, or another non-textual value type, you might want to change how the value is stored in the index. This will let you take advantage of some value type-specific search features such as numerical or date range.
```

            }
        }

        // Part of the interface, but does not need to be implemented for this.
        public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }
    }
}
```
This will ensure that the `price` field in the index is treated as a `double` type (if the `price` field does not exist in the index, it is added).

## Changing IValueSetValidator

An `IValueSetValidator` is responsible for validating a `ValueSet` to see if it should be included in the index.
For example, by default the validation process for the ExternalIndex checks if a `ValueSet` has a category type of either "media" or "content" (not member).
If a `ValueSet` was passed to the ExternalIndex and it did not pass this requirement it would be ignored.

The `IValueSetValidator` is also responsible for filtering the data in the `ValueSet`. For example, by default the validator for the MemberIndex will validate on all the default member properties, so an extra property "PhoneNumber", would not pass validation, and therefore not be included.

> The `IValueSetValidator` implementation for the built in indexes, can be changed like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `IValueSetValidator` implementation for the built-in indexes, can be changed like this:
```

Take a look at our [Examine Quick Start](../quick-start/index.md) to see some examples of how to search the ExternalIndex.
:::

In order to create this index we need five things:

> 1. A definition of the index
> 2. A ConfigureNamedOptions to configure all the fields of the index
> 3. A ValueSetBuilder to build the value sets for the index
> 4. A IndexPopulator to populate the index with the value sets
> 5. A composer to add all these services to the runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. An `UmbracoExamineIndex` implementation that defines the index
2. An `IConfigureNamedOptions` implementation that configures the fields of the index
3. An `IValueSetBuilder` implementation that builds the value sets for the index
4. An `IndexPopulator` implementation that populates the index with the value sets
5. A composer that adds all these services to the runtime.
```

### ProductIndex

```c#
using Examine.Lucene;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Options;

> using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Hosting;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This yields an ambiguous reference in V10

using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Services;

> using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Examine;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Examine;
using IHostingEnvironment = Umbraco.Cms.Core.Hosting.IHostingEnvironment;
```

namespace MySite.MyCustomIndex
{
    public class ProductIndex : UmbracoExamineIndex
    {
        public ProductIndex(
            ILoggerFactory loggerFactory,
            string name,
            IOptionsMonitor<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions> indexOptions,
            IHostingEnvironment hostingEnvironment,
            IRuntimeState runtimeState) : base(loggerFactory,
            name,
            indexOptions,
            hostingEnvironment,
            runtimeState)
        {
        }
    }
}
```

> ### ConfigureCustomIndexOptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ConfigureProductIndexOptions
```

```c#
using Examine;
using Examine.Lucene;
using Lucene.Net.Analysis.Standard;
using Lucene.Net.Index;
using Lucene.Net.Util;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Options;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Configuration.Models;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Scoping;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Services;
using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Examine;

namespace MySite.MyCustomIndex
{

>     public class ConfigureCustomIndexOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public class ConfigureProductIndexOptions : IConfigureNamedOptions<LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions>
```

    {
        private readonly IOptions<IndexCreatorSettings> _settings;
        private readonly IPublicAccessService _publicAccessService;
        private readonly IScopeProvider _scopeProvider;

>         public ConfigureCustomIndexOptions(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        public ConfigureProductIndexOptions(
```

                options.Analyzer = new StandardAnalyzer(LuceneVersion.LUCENE_48);
                options.FieldDefinitions = new(
                    new("id", FieldDefinitionTypes.Integer),
                    new("name", FieldDefinitionTypes.FullText)
                    );
                options.UnlockIndex = true;
                options.Validator = new ContentValueSetValidator(true, false, _publicAccessService, _scopeProvider, includeItemTypes: new[] {"product"});
                if (_settings.Value.LuceneDirectoryFactory == LuceneDirectoryFactory.SyncedTempFileSystemDirectoryFactory)
                {
                    // if this directory factory is enabled then a snapshot deletion policy is required
                    options.IndexDeletionPolicy = new SnapshotDeletionPolicy(new KeepOnlyLastCommitDeletionPolicy());
                }
            }
        }

        public void Configure(LuceneDirectoryIndexOptions options)
        {
            throw new System.NotImplementedException();
        }
    }
}
```

### ProductIndexValueSetBuilder

```c#
using System.Collections.Generic;
using Examine;
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Models;
using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Examine;

> namespace MySite.MyCustomIndex

Reviewer: ```suggestion

namespace MySite.MyCustomIndex
```

Take a look at our [Examine Quick Start](../quick-start/index.md) to see some examples of how to search the ExternalIndex.
:::

> In order to create this index we need five things:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create this index we need five things:
```
